# smear

## Abstract
Smear is a Canadian prairie card game that I was introduced to by my father's side of the family. It can be played with 3–8 people, but is optimally played with 4. [This](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smear_(card_game)) Wikipedia article and [this](https://gamerules.com/rules/canadian-smear/) GameRules article outline the general rules of the game; however, the way my family plays is slightly idiosyncratic: we, for example, do not include the _trey_, which is something referred to in the Wikipedia page. A full outline of the rules we play by is seen in the Rules section. This report attempts to find and describe optimal play based on a [minimax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimax) algorithm. Given the relative lack of popularity of the game (at least compared to other solved games like chess), there is not a large—or frankly any-sized—dataset of games played, which made analysis of the model difficult.

## Rules

### Win conditions
The winner is the team (or individual) which first reaches 21 points. Points are gained or lost after each round of play. For a given round, a team/individual earns a point under the following conditions at the end of a round, for a total of 6 possible points:
 - they possess the highest card of trump suit in the functional deck, which is almost always the Ace (for the definition of functional deck, see Dealing Cards).
 - they possess the lowest card of trump suit in the functional deck
 - one point per number of jokers they possess
 - the "game" condition, calculated via summation over possessed cards where cards are given the following values just for this one point, irrespective of suit: <= 9 = 0, 10 = 10, J = 1, Q = 2, K = 3, A = 4

### Dealing Cards
Smear is played with a standard deck of 52 cards + 2 jokers (making the total size of the deck 54). Each player receives 6 cards no matter how many people are playing. Because of the fact that, inevitably, some cards will be "hiding" (cards that, after dealing 6 to each player, don't show up in anyone's hand), the deck is often truncated into a **functional deck** in such a way that the number of cards that are hiding is as close to 2 as possible. It is, however, important that some cards are hiding, as it adds an extra random element to the game. The size of the deck is typically denoted by its "low;" for example, a deck with a "low" of 9—a deck which has had all cards < 9 removed—is optimal for 4 players, as the number of hiding cards is exactly 2. Each round, players are dealt new cards. Cards are then dealt clockwise.

### Auction / Trump
The importance of the trump suit in smear cannot be overstated. The individual who decides the current round's trump suit is the player who goes first, which implies there is incredible value in going first in smear. The auction decides who goes first, and is where most of Smear's strategy comes from (most of post-auction play is fairly intuitive). As mentioned before, there are 6 possible points to earn in a given round. The auction is where players take turns "betting" on how many points they think their hands can score, with the player who bet the highest number first earning the privilege of going first in a round. Players can only increase the bid, not bid the same amount. If the current "price" is too high, players can pass. As mentioned, for players who want to bid the same size, the one who goes first wins; this implies the order in which people place these bets is important, and is decided by starting with the player after the dealer and moving clockwise, making the dealer go last. This way, similar to poker, everyone gets the first-better advantage.

### Post-Auction Play
As mentioned, post-auction play is relatively formulaic. There are 6 sub-rounds within a round (which means that all cards in your hand will leave and all that will be left will be captured cards). Starting with the winner of the previous sub-round and proceeding clockwise (the winner of the auction if in the first round), each player places a card down onto the table. Trump is as follows: trump suit > jokers > sub-round trump > any other suit (in the event of a tie, the higher card value wins; in the event of a tie between jokers, the first-placed joker wins). Notice in our version of Smear, jokers are below trump suit. Sub-round trump is the suit of the first played card in the sub-round, if that card wasn't of overall trump suit. The winner of a sub-round is the player with the "best" card (i.e. highest-priority trump). The winner keeps all played cards except for the "low;" no matter what, the individual/team who was dealt "low" keeps it. When deciding on what cards to play, a further advantage is given to the player who plays first in the "following trump" rule: if the first card played was a trump, you _must_ play a trump when it comes your turn (if you have one). If the first card played was not of trump suit or a joker (i.e., we are playing with a sub-round trump), this rule becomes a "following suit" rule: you are only required to play a card of the same suit if you have it—you do not have to play a joker or an overall trump if you deem it unstrategic.
